0:00
This episode has probably been the most difficult so far in terms of figuring out how to untangle this very, very deep topic.
Because today, we're talking about something which most people would think ought to be indisputably valuable to any scientist or philosopher or or truth-seeker out there.
0:27
And that is the truth.
After all, philosophy is synonymous with the love of wisdom and therefore with seeking the truth, but unlike most philosophers Nietzsche's relationship with the truth.
0:43
It's very complex.
And more importantly, his relationship with truth-seeking is complex and because of the nature of this topic, at a certain point, it almost becomes difficult to talk about and you start to hit up on the very Tons of what's even possible to say with language.
1:03
And so it becomes just one of the more difficult aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy to understand.
And therefore, you know, when it comes to the nietzschean view of Truth, there are a lot of bad takes out there.
The reason for this isn't because people are being dishonest or because they're stupid or because they have ulterior motives at least, not in general.
1:28
I mean, certainly applies to some people, but I think it is because Nietzsche's, views are developed over multiple works.
And the complete threads of his ideas, cannot be fully understood without following them throughout the whole Canon.
1:47
And sometimes there are things that are Trajectory or appear contradictory.
But if you understand the whole development of his thought, you can make sense of those contradictions.
So first how Nietzsche understood his relationship to the truth?
2:08
Evolved, but it is a relationship and he describes it here in the spoke zarathustra, a short passage, which he quotes himself before.
One of the sections of genealogy of morality Nietzsche does like to occasionally quote himself.
2:24
But anyway, here's the passage quote Brave.
Unconcerned, mocking violent.
Thus wisdom wants us.
She is a woman and loves only a warrior end quote.
2:45
So again, Nietzsche had almost a personal relationship to his own thoughts, feelings and moods.
It's Not Unusual for him to personify a concept such as the truth.
And of course it's a woman because he is a man and a philosopher and Truth is the thing.
3:02
He desires, the thing that he is chasing, he uses the same metaphor elsewhere when he begins the preface to Beyond Good and Evil with the question.
Supposing truth is a woman what then and I love that quotation when people, you know, I just imagine someone hears about Nicha and invariably invariably, you know, they they go and turn to one of his more famous books like Beyond Good and Evil.
3:31
So they pick up Beyond Good and Evil.
And the first thing they're hit with in the preface.
The very first section is that question which just stops you in your tracks because it's such a perplexing question and it immediately In you know you're thinking it stops.
3:46
You cold supposing.
Truth is a woman.
What then it's like, what does that mean?
So Nicha gives some indication.
I mean he writes in that same preface that philosophers up to this point have been very in expert with women.
4:07
That they've been, you know, the implication here is that they've been clumsy, they've been ungraceful they're not willing or perhaps not able to court the truth or to seduce the truth.
And so we might look at the common, would you call it the common wants of the philosopher?
4:27
The common desires of the philosopher to dominate the opposing ideologies to be proven, right?
To put truth into tables of categories and so on these are clumsy ways to win a woman's heart.
So Nietzsche thinks that truth must be romanced and to put things into more chauvinistic.
4:46
Terms one, the truth must be one.
This is the Really the metaphor here, the heart of the metaphor, philosophers must win the heart of the truth.
Just as the warrior in the old days.
You know, the Neolithic Hunters are Bronze Age city-states a warrior distinguishes himself in battle.
5:03
And thus, you know, he wins the hearts of the women in his tribe because a true woman loves only a warrior.
And so, again, we're speaking archaically here, but need she thinks archaically at times and he's often opposed to Modern ideas.
So the metaphor for truth here it's not Much of a statement about women or about truth with a capital T.
5:25
This is a metaphor for the Philosopher's relationship to the truth of, as we said, or what, what Nietzsche wants his own philosopher, philosophical relationship to the truth to be.
And so with that out of the way, there are a few basic principles when trying to understand the nietzschean view of Truth.
5:47
And I've come up with three of them.
You know, others could easily describe the nietzschean approach to truth in a different way or categorize these principles differently or namely more of them than three.
That's all fine.
I'm not claiming an absolute blueprint here.
6:04
This is just what I would consider to be three.
Straightforward principles, which once fully understood illumine the whole of Nietzsche's view on Truth or at least the roughly, the whole of it.
And notice I'm not saying epistemology, because this is not what I'm about to describe is not a system for determining, how we know what we know about reality or for being certain that our truth claims are correct.
6:32
This is Nicha critiquing evaluating the very activity of truth-seeking and our valuation of the activity of truth-seeking would need.
She calls the will to truth, to the extent that you could argue that this is epistemological.
6:50
It's a pathetically epistemological.
So it's nice' pointing out the limits of the will to truth and warning us against error.
And these considerations are not really Two logical either.
Because nature is not concerned with trying to determine the true nature of being or anything like that.
7:11
Usually, those Pursuits are based on being tricked by language, or being tricked by our metaphysical prejudices and Nietzsche's.
Intention is that we not find ourselves tricked.
So now for the three principles, the first is the truth is not the good.
7:33
The second is all, truth is human.
And the third is humans, need lies.
So I'll clarify these briefly before diving into all the source material.
The first principle that the truth is not the good.
7:54
What is meant by this?
Is that Nietzsche, inverts, the relationship between the truth and the good as given by the ancient Greeks and continued by the Christians, and still a widely held secular Prejudice to this.
Day that is to say the truth, as synonymous with or correlated with goodness, what is moral?
8:16
What furthers your health, happiness and well-being.
The truth will set you free.
As we say an idiom, we use in modern times, or in Christianity, the promise of Jesus is I am the way, the truth, and the life.
8:34
So the correlation of all those things Nietzsche says know the truth is sometimes unrelated to what is good for us and is often harmful to the good and he would even argue that to some extent too much.
Truth will always be harmful.
8:52
The second idea or second principle is all truth is human that there is no means of escaping from the phenomenal world and making statements about the Newman old world.
We never touch the true World directly.
In fact, Nietzsche thinks we ought to abolish the very idea of a true world and live entirely within this definitively human world which is the only world will ever know such an attitude means we can make Truly ontological claims in the sense of true being separate from human perception.
9:26
Every single truth claim is therefore indelibly, a human truth.
Truth is therefore not separable from The Human Experience of it or from the human expression of it to draw a distinction.
9:42
There is folly.
Finally, the third principle.
And this is perhaps the scariest for many people Nietzsche claims that human beings need lies.
In fact, he even wonders at times how it is that human beings ever came to desire the truth at all.
10:02
It doesn't make sense.
If knowing the truth is harmful in many cases.
Why would we develop a will to truth?
Many of the most cherished things to humanity, which ground humanity, metaphysically and morally, the things that explain to us our place in the world and in our society.
10:21
And so on are lies.
He concludes there for that man, needs lies or what we might call necessary fictions.
If you don't want to use the term Lies, We need these in order to live.
These three principles can all be posited separately but importantly if one doesn't really confront the full consequences of all three principles, they will not fully understand Nietzsche's.
10:48
View of Truth.
And so, we might notice an immediate difference already in this sort of rough outline of the nietzschean view of truth that I've given, we might notice a difference from someone.
Like, for example, Jordan Pederson, And the sketch he gives of Nietzsche's views.
11:07
I have to bring up Jordan again because he is perhaps the most popular spokesman for Nicha today and his mistakes.
Therefore have serious consequences and so I'll quote from him from a lecture that Jordan gave where he says something that he often repeats in one form or another quote, one of Nietzsche's.
11:28
Most famous Maxim's is that truth serves life and that's a very different idea.
The purpose of Truth say as an accurate representation of the objective World in quote.
Now, this is not a direct quote of Nicha or one of his maxims, but there are passages in Nietzsche's, work that purport a view of truth, that sounds similar to this.
11:51
So I'm not going to say Jordan is making it up out of whole cloth.
But notice that Jordans three-word, explanation of Nietzsche's view on truth.
That is truth.
Serves life leaves out so much important information.
12:08
Most importantly, it completely excludes the third principle that Lies serve life.
Also, the idea of a truth serving life is one thing and the idea of a lie serving life is quite another and Jordan to my knowledge has never addressed this.
12:24
I mean really he believes it is immoral to lie ever and actually the nietzschean view is much closer to the idea that truth more often, than not harms life, the desert the need to tear down the unquestionable.
12:41
All beliefs of one's culture and subject, those beliefs to rational inquiry.
Well, this is what we might call Socrates.
Mm, challenging.
All that was once taken for granted.
This is approach to life and knowledge, which is often seen as the the birth of philosophy.
12:59
Nietzsche thinks an excess of this attitude, is the equivalent of a pathological condition.
Especially when taken to a societal scale, it Heralds the Doom of your society.
And so the destruction of Lies is what is harmful to life for Nicha 4 in pursuit of truths, man.
13:19
Only finds what is human search hard enough and eventually one is left with no Capital tree truths at all, you know, know.
Absolute truth.
Only relative human truths.
And so that is the consequence of having no quote unquote true world at.
13:38
No noumenon, you get rid of the absolute and your left, only with your own human perspective.
So while I understand what Jordan is trying to get at and you will hear some of Nietzsche's writings that approximate that sentiment, as we go on Truth, serves life is actually very bad summary of the nietzschean attitude to truth and I was guilty of, you know, falling for this characterization myself once upon a time because again, Jordan is not strictly speaking in correct, but what he's done is that, he's over simplified things to the point of being wrong.
14:15
So, uh, On first glance the formulation truth serves life or truth ought to serve life might make sense.
But over time you realize that this is not a good interpretation because it doesn't give the entire picture.
So now we'll discuss the principles in more depth and begin.
Of course with the first Principle as I've laid out, the truth is not the good.
14:36
To illustrate, this will look to Beyond Good and Evil Book to aphorism 39.
And I'll quote about the first half of the aphorism quote.
No one will readily consider a Doctrine true simply because it makes us happy or virtuous, except perhaps the gentle idealists who go into raptures about the good, the true and the Beautiful and allow all sorts of colorful clumsy and good-natured desirable things to swim around in confusion in their pond.
15:13
Happiness and virtue are no arguments but people even prudent.
People do like to forget that causing unhappiness and evil are by the same token, no counter-arguments, something could well be true, although it is at the same time, harmful and dangerous to the highest degree.
15:32
In fact, it could even be part of the fundamental composition of existence that people are destroyed when they fully recognize this point.
So that the strength of a spirit Might be measured by how much it could still endure of the truth or put more clearly by the degree.
15:49
It would have to have truth diluted sweetened muffled or falsified But there is no doubt about the fact that evil and unhappy people are more favored and have a greater probability of success in discovering certain parts of the truth to say, nothing of the evil people who are happy a species, which moralists are silent about perhaps toughness and cunning provide more favorable conditions for the development of the strong independent Spirit, and the philosopher than that gentle refined conciliatory.
16:25
Good nature. and that art of taking things lightly which people value in a scholar and value, rightly end quote The passage is fairly self-explanatory.
It serves to decouple the association with truth and goodness and Nietzsche even raises the possibility that perhaps existence is so constituted that to know the truth is to be destroyed.
16:51
And perhaps there are parts of the truth that the evil person is better to equipped to understand than a good person.
We might think of the insights into human nature one gains during you know extreme experiences such as during wartime.
You know, think think on how a person who thrived on such an environment, you know, a sadist or a barbarian might be able to learn things about human nature that no one else could.
17:17
You know, that's basically what the movie Apocalypse.
Now in the book or the book, it was based on Heart of Darkness.
That's what these that text in the film are both about, or it's one strong theme that through, you know, horror and suffering and immorality.
And so on one achieves, a sort of Enlightenment, when gains access to wisdom, that civilized men don't have access to.
17:42
So need, she thinks, you know, he hits it at the end here, but he thinks there's a serious difference between a philosopher and a scholar.
While most people would see those things as hand-in-hand Nietzsche thinks that a modern scholar or a scholar of his own day, they were not capable of becoming great philosophers.
18:02
They've all become studious, tamed drones trained in one specialty or another.
You're not thinking particularly creatively they're you know, they're experimenting and studying but it's all by rote, that's his critique.
18:18
But there's an even deeper history issue and I think that's the fact that knowledge is opposed in a deep sense to human well-being.
Nature quotes from Lord Byron in another work in human All Too Human.
18:35
It's like right at the beginning of the believe the second or perhaps the third book of human All Too Human.
But it's these three lines of poetic verse from Lord Byron quote.
Sorrow is knowledge.
18:51
Those who know the most must mourn, the deepest over the Fatal truth.
The tree of knowledge is not the tree of life and quote So there we have Byron using a Christian metaphor to overturn the basic Christian idea of goodness and Truth as linked.
19:12
So of course, the tree of knowledge of Good and Evil is what Adam and Eve ate from and because they tasted Forbidden Knowledge, they were expelled from the garden and expelled from their communion with God.
So in that case, truth did not serve life, the Tree of Life.
19:28
Meanwhile was, it was a symbol of God's Gift of everlasting life.
And kind, which was said to be in the midst of the Garden of Eden.
So this is a wonderful quotation that nature chose for expressing the problem.
The, the unquestionable Leti of one's values provides a sort of strength.
19:49
At the Zenith of an Empires power, for example, you know, their aims and their goals, and their beliefs are unquestioned.
There are truths are proved by their own success Nietzsche.
Saw the rise of what he called, the theoretical approach to life, as a symptom of the decline of Hellenic Greece, for example, and indeed, you know, something that that hastened, its decline.
20:11
What replaced the old religious certainties of Hellenic?
Greece was a skeptical approach to life a scientific Worldview optimism for the future.
And so he talks about this in his 1886 preface to birth of tragedy.
No, he Compares.
20:27
This optimism to the naive fantasy of the terminal, patient, who imagines that somehow, he will miraculously get better, you know, because he cannot conceive of, and therefore refuses to believe in his own mortality.
What you desire is in some sense, what you lack.
20:45
And so, a culture that needs optimism as a culture without a future where as Nietzsche says that Greek tragedy during the time when Hellenic Greece was still vivacious and strong was a quote neurosis.
Of the healthy.
And I've talked about this before but it's just important to sort of the one piece of the puzzle here to recap as his position on Socrates and Socrates, mm, what he broadly calls in more general terms the theoretical approach to life.
21:15
So in that book in birth of tragedy Nietzsche, I think first really raises the issue of knowledge is threatening to life and this is in section 7, quote.
Knowledge kills action, action requires the veils of Illusion.
21:35
That is the doctrine of Hamlet, not that cheap wisdom of Jack, the dreamer who reflects too much and as it were from an excess of possibilities does not get around to action, not reflection, no.
True knowledge, and insight into the horrible truth outweighs any motive for Action, both in Hamlet and in the DNS Ian man, end quote So, even that might require a bit more explanation as to why knowledge kills action, you know, he's first of all, he is, of course, referring to Hamlet from Shakespeare's play who his central conflict in the, in the play is when and how to act and being sort of paralyzed with indecision.
22:18
And, you know, Nicha basically alleges that this is a out of an insight into the horrible truth that has paralyzed Hamlet, not Sort of, you know, in excess of possibilities.
But to further, explain what he's talking about here, elsewhere in the book, he quotes from Garrett, has conversations with Eckerman, it's like a series of letters between kirtan Ackerman, he quotes a conversation where Goethe says that productivity is not simply limited to books and plays and poems.
22:54
But that there is a quote, productivity of deeds and in the same conversation Ation earn quoting, it Nicha Praises what he calls the non theoretical, man.
The man of action.
So we might imagine a soldier in a life-or-death struggle on the battlefield, the power of being unreflective, the power of being unselfish critical.
23:21
The power of this is you simply accept the quote-unquote truths as they're given to you by your culture, or by your, you know, superiors.
And when it's time to act You simply act, the soldier who in that situation is is self-critical and is questioning, you know, maybe he's questioning whether the war effort is even worth it, or whether the cause is just or whether his own Nation, might be at fault to some degree, whoever were to allow these considerations to be real for him and serious.
23:53
Well, he's going to be impeded in his duties as a soldier.
Maybe he'll die or he'll be less effective.
So, You know, most of us philosophy nerds.
We don't tend to romanticize the soldier's life.
So we might think well who cares?
What makes a good soldier and did this?
24:09
I would simply say, I use this example because it's a case, where you face, an existential threat, you know, to yourself, or to your Society or possibly to your whole way of life.
And, at the very least in a battle, you, you face a threat to yourself, your own, your own body, and your own life.
24:27
And so, we can from our coziness and our comfort behind the All of civilization discount the advantages of believing unquestioning unquestioningly and you know the tenants of our society.
But on the battlefield this Advantage is well-known any situation in which our existence depends on it.
24:45
You know acting quickly decisively you know that in that point having an absence of self-criticism or self-reflection is Paramount I could see one arguing that conviction and self-criticism, you know, these can co-exist.
25:03
But I would reply that in the moment of action.
The self-criticism must be suspended, just as a brute Fact.
One has to win over over the other.
In order for decision-making to be possible.
There are always a thousand doubts that can be raised against the any conviction as Descartes, you know, shows us with his methodology of Doubt.
25:21
Wonder were to take skepticism deadly seriously and let it guide their actions.
The Of this would be accordingly.
Deadly.
It would result in the inability to act at all.
If you doubted every single decision you made, And so the effect on the human psyche, when someone fully exits, the moral and the metaphysical, grounding of one's culture, it is not there for benign or easily, dismissable Nietzsche believed that stepping outside of one's most, cherished metaphysical assumptions could be very dangerous.
25:59
One can lose those myths, which Enchanted the world and provided these intangible things like value and meaning The degree to which someone can handle truth, without having it sugar-coated.
As he says, that's the real test for Nietzsche, which means, by contrast that the truth is bitter, maybe even the truth is poisonous to, you know, again, utilized the metaphor here as Byron, says those who know the most mourn, the deepest.
26:26
So the truth rather than liberating or enlivening it often hurts it, tears away.
What is dear to us and when followed zealously, as the most Supreme of all, Use truth leads us away from all safety and comfort.
And it takes a heavy psychological toll in this.
26:45
So, this is why Nietzsche often describes the truly, intellectual life as difficult and rugged, you become set apart from your fellow men and their world of, you know, moral certainties.
So, the Thinker is not guaranteed, peace of mind or a soothing balm for his suffering, it's quite the opposite.
27:04
The truth is often, what causes the thinkers.
Boring. so nature in an he Made this very plane or he stated this very plainly in an early letter to his sister.
And he wrote quote, Hear the ways of men divided. if you wish to strive for peace of soul and happiness, then believe, if you wish to be a disciple of Truth than inquire and quote, I think in light of that, we can understand why Nicha saw what he called toughness or hardness as a virtue required by the free spirit.
27:49
The truth is hard.
It takes, you know, takes a tough son of a bitch to deal with the truth.
Most people will not like the truth.
They won't be able to handle it without an allusion to sort of sugar coat it.
So, We'll move on.
Now to the second principle that all truth is human and this section is where Jordan Peterson can get his do so to speak.
28:12
Because some of the conclusions one could draw from this principle could indeed lead.
One to the idea that truth ought to serve life.
All knowledge that we have access to is inseparable from our human understanding of it.
28:30
All experience of reality is inseparable from our human sense.
Organs insofar as we never experienced reality Beyond them and therefore, we must conclude that Concepts such as absolute truth or truth with a capital T.
28:46
These are contradictions in terms If knowledge didn't create reality, if reality wasn't created by a Consciousness which would be the theistic view you know reality was created by a God.
So first you have Consciousness and knowledge then you have reality but if that didn't happen then reality began without knowledge knowledge then arose within beings that evolved conscious beings evolved from a previously unconscious world.
29:19
And so that means all knowledge is held within mines which are shaped by natural processes, which means they're limited by biology.
Among other things.
It means to speak of Truth is to speak of Relativity.
To speak of knowledge is to speak of something, which only exists embodied within multiple different perspectives which are often contradictory with one another, you know, in terms of the content of their knowledge, their motivations and how they see the world and so on.
29:52
And so this makes there is no ultimate View and so this makes all ontological claims ultimately nonsensical.
And so that's the consequence of getting rid of ontology.
Nietzsche's, position is what we might call, you know, epistemic relativity or another label for it might be perspectivism all knowledge.
30:15
That humans possess is relative to The Human Condition and As we cannot evaluate a true statement by whether or not it approximates some ontological reality or Newman or reality or maybe this is a better way to put it some truth value independent of human interest or perception because that does not exist.
30:37
Truth independent of human perception.
Independent of Human Experience, independent of human desires and so on this does not exist.
This would you know if we Were to take this proposition seriously, it would require us to reject the correspondence theory of Truth which in some sense it's that's the modernist view of Truth is the view that truth is defined as that which most approximates or corresponds to quote unquote reality that is a statement is true to the degree that it corresponds to reality.
31:11
But there's no absolute standard of what constitutes reality, the most charitable that we could be to correspondence theory of Truth.
It is to relocate the reference point not to an absolute reality.
But to our shared human reality which is reality.
31:28
Mediated, through all of our sense, organs and through our minds and through our expression which is to say through language.
And so we perceive reality through all these barriers which themselves distort reality.
Another important thing about this is then we can't therefore talk about the level of Correspondence.
31:48
A statement has to a dispassionate disinterested in human reality.
The truth.
Contrary to what the philosophers often claim is the least dispassionate.
The least disinterested thing in the world, this is sort of what Nietzsche alleges we have no disinterested, truths, no truths, independent of the transformation and falsification of reality, through human perception.
32:11
And so I'll show we evaluate truth claims without an absolute standard for what constitutes reality.
Nietzsche has his ideas.
So we have this, this passage in Beyond Good and Evil in the first chapter which is called on the prejudices of philosophers and this is aphorism for Quote, the false necessity of an opinion is not for us any objection to it.
32:40
It is here perhaps that our new language sounds most.
Strangely, the question is, how far an opinion is life, furthering, life-preserving, species, preserving, perhaps, species, rearing end quote, So notice that Niche is not saying that what serves life ought to be regarded as truth.
33:03
He admits the the false.
NE some of this hypothetical opinion were considering he has to admit it's false in this when he says that it's false NE Siz not any objection to it.
That means that what he is saying is that the truth value in terms of a correspondence theory of Truth is irrelevant not that the truth value is somehow tied to the usefulness or helpful.
33:26
So, the statement statements don't become truer because they are more life-preserving.
Rather, his point is actually the opposite that the healthfulness is what matters.
And again, that this is something unrelated to the truth of the matter.
And so, if we take his warnings about the dangers of Truth, seriously, we might conclude that fostering the preservation of life and truthfulness, rarely overlap.
33:51
The strength of a position does not make the position true.
Perhaps we might say it makes the position strong.
You know, it makes it a font of strength and strength is simply more important than truth and this new form of future philosophy that Nietzsche's.
34:07
Hoping for You know, and I've already done some explaining as to why he doesn't think that inhuman truth is possible, but if we want to really back up, these arguments will have to get into the weeds a little bit.
But you know, that's why we're here, isn't it to go into the Absurd in, you know, exhaustive detail.
34:29
So one work that sheds, some light on this is on truth and lies in the extra moral sense.
That is an early essay that nature wrote while still at Basel.
It's considered unfinished or a draft, you know at least for my understanding and it is relatively short.
34:50
And so I'll draw quite heavily on this essay to explain this particular aspect of Nietzsche's, view of the truth.
In addition to some other sources as well but in on truth and lies nature tries to come to an understanding of how humans and evolve species ever came to have anything like a drive to find truth.
35:10
You know this question always fashion, fascinated him.
And it seem counterintuitive.
So truth doesn't serve the other animals.
They live entirely without history without self-reflection.
Without self-criticism man has been taught.
Meanwhile that to know and seek the truth.
35:28
Almost, you know, it's a Divine duty but if man is an evolved species than truth is not given from on high.
And this is not really a Divine duty.
This is simply that was simply a post-hoc explanation for our truth-seeking habits.
He also in this essay explorers you know language as inherently linked to our mental process of concept formation.
35:51
And so he anticipates Vic enstein by half a century and he implicitly Works within the framework.
That language delimits, the boundaries of thought, reform languages, as a collective act language cannot be.
You know, it's not the mental production of a single individual are Concepts, which are shaped by the limits of language.
36:13
Are also formed collectively and to elaborate on this actually, before getting into the essay.
Here's something from his bit later than that.
After he left Basel from the gay science where he says, quote Consciousness has developed only under pressure of the need for communication that from the start.
36:33
It was needed and useful only between human beings particularly between those who commanded and those who obeyed and that it also develops only in proportion to the degree of this.
Utility Consciousness is really only a net of communication between When beings it is only a such that it had to develop a solitary human being who lived like a beast of prey would not have needed it in quote.
36:58
And so he continued to think about these things long after the essay.
But this means that the linguistic shape of our concept formation is not the product of a single sovereign individual reason.
It means that our thought cannot be liberated from all constraints.
37:16
It's limited by the horizons.
Of the communities thought.
And so through language, we represent the world to ourselves but the very Act of doing.
So must falsify the world to some extent within the boundaries of the concepts that our community has forged into language.
37:33
And so this may first appear as though the correspondence theory of Truth has a Lifeline because if we cannot have a belief in an absolute reality, at least we have this shared agreed-upon, view of reality, but you The devil is in the details as always.
37:51
And so Nietzsche writes in on truth and lies, quote, every word instantly becomes a concept precisely insofar as it is not supposed to serve as a reminder of the unique and entirely individual original experience to which it owes its origin, but rather a word becomes a concept insofar as it simultaneously has to fit countless more or less similar cases. which means purely and simply cases, which are never equal and thus all together, unequal every concept arises from the equation of unequal things and quote, So this is how language is another barrier of distortion.
38:36
Languages can express truths, but they are only truths in so far as they are valid statements within the internal logic of those languages.
In fact, language can often trick us obscuring, some things from us because of how the concepts are arranged or conflated under a single label, you know?
38:58
And so again, in spite of the early data, this sááá this, I've got a bunch of notes from elsewhere in his work bout.
This one kind of issue about language.
You know, mainly just to clarify because when he's talking about grouping things into categories, how that equates on equal things when you know and why he thinks our falsification of the world holds true.
39:19
Even when it comes to mathematics, we find in the first part of Beyond Good and Evil.
For example, the quote Without constant falsification of the World by means of numbers, man.
Cannot live in quote.
And so what even the numbers are a falsification, is because nature rights and human All Too Human book.
39:38
One section 19.
Quote, the laws of numbers assume there are identical things but in fact, nothing is identical with anything else and to quote, so why is nothing identical with anyone?
Anything else?
39:54
What is he talking about here?
Because the boundaries that a language draws around a given concept are completely arbitrary or rather their contingent on our human needs and our human level of perception.
So numbers like other Concepts.
40:10
They're formed by abstracting the general case from the specific phenomenon and so where we designate one tree, we might say that's a single tree over there.
It would be just as correct to designate a trillion particles.
In order to understand the tree is only one part of the whole forest or the root system, or the mycelial network, the all the whole ecosystem.
40:33
And so on, you know, is the tree separate from the atmosphere of oxygen and, you know, the carbon dioxide expelled by the you know animals that it Breitbart breeds.
Are we separate from that, you know, we designate the tree as a single phenomenon because it appears to us that way on this human level of resolution more to the point.
40:53
It appears to us that way because of our Biological needs and preferences.
We see individual phenomena based on what is useful for us to perceive.
So this doesn't mean the things that we don't perceive are less, real just means, we don't perceive them.
41:09
They're not included in the formation of the concept.
And in each is notebooks in 1885 or might be 1886, he elaborates on this theory of conscious perception as shaped by evolutionary usefulness and so this helps contextualize his views on Truth seeking further, he writes.
41:31
And this is found in Will To Power 505 quote.
Our perceptions as we understand them.
IE the sum of all those perceptions, The Becoming conscious of which was useful and essential to us and to the entire organic process, therefore not all Perceptions in general.
41:51
EG not the electric.
This means we have senses for only a selection of perceptions those with which we have to concern ourselves in order to preserve ourselves.
Consciousness is present only to the extent that Consciousness is It cannot be doubted.
42:07
That all sense perceptions are permeated with value, judgments useful, and harmful consequently Pleasant or unpleasant end quote.
So, the argument is simply that if we had some advantage to gain by perceiving, electric currents, as he mentions, then we would have a sense organ for doing that, but we don't.
42:29
And so the very Horizon of our perceptions, which make up the foundation of our conscious awareness are shaped by preference, which is to say by the preferences dictated by Evolution and natural selection.
What gives us Advantage is what over the Neons, gave rise to height and perceptions perception.
42:51
Followed were the survival Instinct LED, rather it followed.
What Nietzsche would say, is on a deeper level, the will to power And so even our perceptions.
They have this biological limitation to them.
And then when we express those perceptions, they have this for one that we the way we make our concept formation is within this shared, net of Consciousness with whole community.
43:16
And then when we express it, it's through language.
And so the most famous Paris paragraph in the essay, on truth and lies in the extra moral sense is key to contextualizing these Nietzsche.
Considerations on Truth.
Admittedly, it kind of poses, the danger of pushing.
43:36
If your, if you were leaning towards the irrationalist take on Nietzsche's view of Truth, it might push you a little further towards that, but we have to disentangle it to to understand the full picture.
So I'll quote here again from on truth and lies quote.
43:53
What then is truth a movable host of metaphors?
Met enemies and anthropomorphisms in short, a sum of human relations, which have been poetically and rhetorically intensified transferred and embellished.
44:09
And which after long usage, seem to a people to be fixed canonical in binding, troops are Illusions, which we have forgotten or Illusions.
They are metaphors that have become worn out.
Have been drained of sensuous Force coins, which have lost their embossing and are now considered as metal, and no longer as coins and quote.
44:34
And so to understand the passage, we have to understand what Nietzsche means by truth in the sense that he's talking about here, he's talking about what he's saying.
The whole concept of truth comes from why we talk about Truth at all is because we designate certain things as true.
44:56
Logically valid backed up by evidence.
However, you want to say it the way we do that is by the social conventions, expressed in language.
So, you know, where does truth exists.
Well, truth exists in truth claims and statements about the truth about reality.
45:13
And so what the picture he gives or the the accounting he gives of the origin of how Concepts were formed in language.
Well he says, you know a sound assemble a marking comes to stand for a meaning by means of some expression or some vocalization early humans.
45:33
Indicated something, And so he goes on to describe in the essay to use the usual designations was advantageous to all involved.
So if you, if you meant to indicate poisonous but instead you indicated harmless right, you use the wrong designation, this could be very dangerous to other people.
45:55
And so once man begins to communicate then to be truthful is to be is that's advantageous to the whole community.
And this is why we've always had a high social value.
Placed on truth to give the conventional designation for a thing.
46:10
Becomes associated with morality.
But if you were to use your words in a way such that you don't use the conventional designation intentionally saying one thing and doing another, for example, or you know intentionally designating harmless and poisonous would be the Condor, correct linguistic indicator.
46:30
Then you become regarded as a moral because you've become a threat to the community.
So for all the irrationalist fuel that this passage provides in this unfinished essay, what Nietzsche Doing is he searching for a naturalistic explanation of truth-seeking.
46:50
He treats the phenomenon of the truth Drive, the will to truth as a genuine phenomenon to explain it unravel.
And this is his attempt and I think it gives he gives us a believable hypothesis.
And so to sum up the argument nature.
Argues The concept of Truth first originates from our dirt, our duty to use the usual metaphors so that lines up, more or less with the vidkun Stein idea, that a words meaning is determined by the common use language is not, you know, arbitrary and prawn, the private level or on the individual level.
47:27
It's determined by Collective Agreement for furthermore.
Truth is not something given from on high or something existing within a world Beyond.
But something that we grew to seek after something we adapted to Value something, which we found had usefulness for us.
47:43
And so that's again a very different story from the Christian view or even from the scientific realist view of the truth that exists in secular society today which does still seem to hold to some idea of like the dispassionate disinterested in human truth.
48:00
And I still hear the correspondence theory of Truth.
You know, expressed often during this early period of his writing when he's writing on truth and lies, some have interpreted Nietzsche as a neocon thien, this does not mean he was in agreement with Kant or, you know, a disciple of conned.
48:19
It's it means that he worked within the framework that Kant had established as kant's influence on German.
Philosophy was so great that it demanded a response.
And I think there is something to the idea that Nietzsche carried through that idea of the phenomena Newman, a division to its logical conclusion.
48:38
And this is the, you know, the division of the world of mere appearances in the true world as we discussed in the very first episode, you know how Nicha sees the inaccessibility of the true world as its own reputation.
And so at that time in Germany, there were a number of neocon tian's, you know, scientists and philosophers, and philosophers of science.
48:59
Ants that attempted to verify conce ideas through experiment and the implications of the world, we experience being a mere representation created by our sense organs, this raises the question.
Well, then would have being with different sense, organs experience, a different world.
49:17
And so figures such as Hermann Von helmholtz there for attempted to study the nervous systems of you know, various animals and their sense faculties get some idea of how some, you know, other creatures would construct a representation of the world.
So could they perhaps since these other natural phenomena that we do not such as the electrical field?
49:38
Von helmholtz is a scientist in a philosopher of Science and a neocon thien in his approach.
And we know that Von helmholtz was very influential on Nicha He Von helmholtz expressed the neo-kantian perspective in 1853.
49:56
So, I'll quote perhaps the relation between our senses and the external World, maybe best enunciated as follows.
Our Sensations are for us, only symbols of the objects of the external world, and correspond to them only in some such way as written characters or articulate words to the things.
50:15
They don't they denote.
They give us.
It is true information, respecting the properties of things without us, but no better information than we give a blind man about color by verbal descriptions in quote.
This is basically the neo-kantian perspective on knowledge in a nutshell, empirical reasoning and the form of science can tell us about the phenomenal world, but all this knowledge comes to us through the filter of the senses which means it never escapes the phenomenal world, you know, Nietzsche you know.
50:50
So to speak accepts the same concern but he further added as we mentioned that language itself is another barrier and we should keep in mind though that these claims about knowledge.
We're At the time postmodern or anti-scientific or irrationalist but grounded within the spirit of scientific investigation, you know Nietzsche as a philologist was himself, a scientist philologist was considered a Visa and shaft in the German University system at the time.
51:18
Von helmholtz was in the hard Sciences even by today's standards and he also you know express the same position And so Nietzsche even go so far as to suggest that the scientific approach to reality is, what may help us undermine the type of idealism that believes in, you know, the truth with a capital T.
51:40
Attainable by the human mind, the inhuman truth can be encapsulated within our reason and this is because science.
Popper, would later frame it this way, but science works by falsifying hypotheses, not by verifying truths.
Science is always overturning past doctrines, you know, at further sort of provides a sketch of the laws of nature and so nature rights and on truth and lies that science can quote dig successfully in this shaft forever in quote.
52:12
And so he says, you know, science has discovered more and more regularity in the natural world.
And so, this is acted as a seal of confirmation, you know.
So he says, quote how little does this regularity?
Resemble a product of the imagination.
End quote.
52:29
And so if science were simply pure subjectivity in this purely, the product of the mind, we would not expect the kinds of results, the kind of regularity we see from scientific investigation.
So this is not a denial of the quote-unquote, you know, objective World, which is to say, the world is not purely the product of human imagination.
52:50
That would be an ontological claim and that's not the argument.
If anything, the argument is that we cannot represent a merely objective World.
It must be Mix of the object of in the human, that is what the world of phenomena is, phenomena, are experienced in represented and thus, their distorted by Consciousness.
53:08
And by concept formation, and yet, within this world of phenomena, we can use the Sciences to discover patterns and laws.
And so Nietzsche's.
Not he's not denying any of that, he's affirming it, but so Nietzsche's.
Not he's never one to just only come down on one side of the issue.
53:26
And so he turns about and he critiques, the faith and Science and the same paragraph.
Quotes against this.
The following must be said, if each of us had a different kind of sense, perception, if we could only perceive things.
53:45
Now, as a bird now, is a worm now is a plant or if one of us saw stimulus as read another as blue.
Well, a third even heard the same stimulus as a sound.
Then no one would speak of such a regularity of nature.
54:01
Rather nature would be grasped only as a creation, which is subjective in the highest degree.
After all.
What is a law of nature as such for us?
We are not acquainted with it in itself, but only with its effects and quote.
54:19
So we see here, Annie just thought of clear, resemblance to the Von helmholtz quote, this is a concern with the distance between the world of the senses in the noumenon.
But once again, Nitra is pointing to the conclusion of these considerations that the idea of truths, independent of human knowledge becomes more and more absurd, both Nietzsche's criticism of, you know, scientism and his praise of science, where it is, do speak to the same.
54:47
Underlying idea.
All of our truths are inescapably, human Sciences, useful, and so far as it, humbles us, and reminds us of our limited human framework for understanding.
And so far, as it is understood as knowledge of the phenomenal world.
55:03
I eat not knowledge of so-called objective truths, but science is harmful and so far as we forget to put science in its proper context and think it can bring us the truth with a capital T, which is basically the faith that human knowledge.
55:18
Can escape Humanity.
When we imagine that science is a magical thing that can escape the limits of humanity.
We are doing the same thing that the, you know, the Moral Moral realist is doing, for example, we're trying to take our knowledge, which is motivated, and interested in Bound By The Human Condition from the very start, and we're going to try and take that and making it as something separate from us.
55:40
Something, disembodied, something, akin to a platonic form.
None of this means that we can't distinguish between a statement about an objective fact, in the sense of like referring to the properties of an object and not a subject versus say, a moral claim.
The objective subjective distinction, you know, can still exist as two separate Concepts and language.
56:00
And in fact, they must exist.
But this all exists within the world of human truths, not disembodied truths.
And so now with the remaining time, we'll briefly touch on the third and final principle that humans need lies which might probably be somewhat intuitively clear.
56:24
Now since its implied by many of Nietzsche's, other statements that I've quoted up to this point This position may be roughly described as one word for it might be fictional is mmm.
So remember, it's not the truth or falsity of a judgment that matters Tunisia, but the healthfulness of a judgment that really matters.
56:43
We therefore possess a need to believe things that are irrational or unjustified or unprovable This is because as we pursue greater knowledge of the world, you know, digging in this mine shaft of scientific knowledge.
For instance, we find that we undermine through this truth-seeking things like values.
57:03
Again, the relative or the relevant, distinction, that Nietzsche attacks is not objective versus subjective but human versus inhuman grounded within the world of human knowledge and experience.
We can discover objective truths through science truths.
57:18
We discover about objects about in an inanimate things and natural processes and physical laws and so on.
But, you know, rather than a true statement about a subject or subjective human concerns such as values, but he writes in On Good and Evil.
And one of the most important sentences in that work, quote behind logic and its seeming sovereignty of movement stand evaluations which is to say physiological demands for the preservation of a certain way of life end quote so we can have a system of internal logic based on a series of first principles but those first principles the axioms of your system are Are arbitrary and their arbitrary from a logical standpoint.
58:06
So we can say that if one is a utilitarian and believes that reducing the total sum of suffering and death is the highest good.
You know, the greatest good for the greatest many.
When presented with two courses of action, one of which kills five people in the other one, you know, kills one person.
58:23
It's logical to take the course that kills only one, prevent the most suffering, but the first principle upon, which you're acting that You know, the greatest good for the greatest many.
That is not itself logical.
It's on some sense, just arbitrary principle that you settled on.
58:45
You can always ask why and you can follow that back to Infinity.
That's the ought is Chasm.
And so as we apply our truth-seeking to everything in the domain of human knowledge, as this totalizing will to truth becomes the all-encompassing value.
We find that the subjective truths.
59:02
They Don't Really comply with our systems of logic and reason.
We find that our reason must be motivated by something, but that we do not get our motivations by Logic.
What drives us is what we might call the pre rational or the non-rational.
59:19
We did we Define Concepts such as goodness, Justice morality and so on, but the the arbitrariness of our first principles prevents us from speaking about them in an absolute sense.
There can be Justice within a given system but not Justice in and of itself.
59:38
There can be morality or goodness relative to a certain moral code.
But not the good as such.
Those are internally contradictory ideas as Nietzsche asks in his famous attack on the stoics.
And this is in Beyond good and evil as well.
59:55
He says, quote is not living valuing, preferring being unjust and quote As we said before, preference laces, every cell of every living organism and not for logical reasons.
But for physiological reasons are very perceptions are delimited by this drive, to self advantage and what we focus on within those perceptions, as defined by that same drive and then out of this judgments form, as the inevitable conclusion of those limitations.
1:00:29
And this means that truth is nature rights.
Is something with which rests on a foundation of error are reason Works towards goals which are not themselves reasonable but simply demands.
And so, will we arrive at this inevitable?
1:00:47
Conclusion that since our values are needed for living and since we need goals and meaning and truth.
And so on that, by that same token humans, need lies.
And that includes for the most part all of our spiritual and religious traditions.
1:01:05
And so, you know, and I don't mean to be disrespectful there, I'm not saying that they're intentional falsehoods, rather human beings have a, we have a tendency to take experiences, feelings ideas and paint them on to the whole universe.
And over time, we forget the origins of these beliefs, you know?
1:01:23
They they attain a mystical character.
We forget that an observation was merely relative to our own time and place, and we universalize it to all mankind or two examples.
Distance itself.
And so this is what he means in the passage from on truth and lies in the non or extra moral sense that I quoted earlier.
1:01:43
He says, truths are Illusions.
We forgotten our Illusions and so this is where it is important to, you know, introduce yet.
Another Nuance because Mankind needs both truth and falsehood rationality and irrationality anicca accepts both because both are part of the whole person.
1:02:04
So you know, one of his projects throughout his career is the reconciliation of man's rational needs with his irrational needs.
We can't say that man can do without truth entirely, you know, even if we were speaking simply of human truths as we've described them because without some means of knowing the Ruth.
1:02:24
We cannot survive.
You know?
Remember these perceptions that we have are aimed at our our survival in our advantage in are flourishing.
The drive for power, it's axiomatic, it's not itself proven by rationality, and this is what Nietzsche thinks all things seek after.
1:02:43
And so when we examine the multi, farias drives within a person or within All Mankind, we find that many of them are irrational.
And that reason plays this role as the tool used by the drives to achieve their ends.
And so, in one of Nietzsche's notes, he says that reason is a relationship and an Rising force that exists between man's irrational.
1:03:07
Drives believe that's how he puts it all there.
I don't have to quote front of me at the moment.
But so since the rationale exists on this foundation of the irrational, as we've said, then from an anthropological standpoint.
We develop the rational Drive the truth drive as a means of satisfying irrational goals.
1:03:28
And so we have this will to truth and because we begin to see truthfulness as moral.
We began to see the LIE accordingly as immoral and this led to the idea that truth-seeking is good in and of itself.
1:03:43
And so the will to truth.
It's a transformation of the underlying thing, driving all life, which is the will to power And so, that's Nature's ultimate explanation.
Over the truth-seeking drive comes from.
The problem is that now, this will to truth is attacking the ends, which it was created as the means to serve.
1:04:04
So, you know, Nietzsche says that, that, that ends is power.
But you might look, you know, at bottom and a human being to say that that it's like exists in the form of our instincts, or the rational drives to fight and to procreate and survive and so on.
1:04:23
This truth Drive challenges and tries to eliminate the irrational, which is a very thing that gave rise to it.
And so we could say that the will to truth taken to.
The extreme is unhealthy because it is self-defeating, Nietzsche's project.
It can be understood in one sense as an attempt to find the way to satisfy the will to truth, but in a healthy manner, which means in a manner that doesn't undermine our necessary fictions.
1:04:52
We can't really sum up this whole X examination of Nietzsche's, view of truth without including that he himself.
Obviously found an immense value in The Pursuit Of Truth and again each has a philosopher.
He's a philologist in this part of the Sciences he is a truth Seeker What sets him apart from other philosophers as that he's honest about what truth-seeking is and he understands the value of untruth.
1:05:21
And so the last passage will look at is from the gay science and I've chosen it because it gives a, it's a very different on almost oppositional message to the Jordan Pederson.
Truth ought to serve life idea.
1:05:38
It really reads almost like a direct refutation of that characterization of Nisha.
But far, far more important than that.
It's one of my all-time favorite passages from from nature and it speaks to the character of the man is a truth Seeker, but it's just, it's a great passage, it's cool.
1:05:56
It's called in media Vita which means in the middle of life and it's the gay science.
Number 324, Quote.
No, life has not disappointed.
Me on the contrary I find it truer more desirable and mysterious every year ever since the day when the Great Liberator came to me the idea that life could be an experiment of the Seeker for knowledge and not a duty, not a Calamity, not a trickery and knowledge itself.
1:06:30
Let it be something else for others, for example, a bed to rest on or the way to such a bed.
Or a diversion or a form of leisure.
For me, it is a world of dangers and victories in which heroic feelings to find places to dance and play Life.
1:06:49
As a means to knowledge with this principle in one's heart, one can live, not only boldly but even gaily and laughed gaily to And who knows how to laugh anyway and Live?
Well, if he does, not first know, a good deal about war and victory and quote, So it's not that the truth ought to serve life but that tune each of the good life was life as a means to knowledge.
1:07:20
As much as he critiqued, the unhealthy expression of the will to truth and Society at large.
And even especially among scholars in Academia Nietzsche, considered that there were some people who could tolerate more truth than others.
The truly free spirit, will have the intellectual toughness for that.
1:07:38
And so here we see in full relief again the nietzschean warrior mentality towards philosophy, That the pursuit of knowledge can take this form as conflict or request or struggle in which one overcomes obstacles and endures hard realities and receives rewards only Upon A, you know, a hard-fought victory.
1:08:01
And so this is a heroic form of philosophy.
And, you know, maybe Nietzsche's view, the great majority would be better off to avoid too much, truth seeking.
But the warrior philosopher is measured by how much truth he can endure.
And, you know, so actually at the end, if we recall the simple formulation from the letter to Nietzsche's, sister, you know, here are the ways of men divided if you wish to strive for peace of soul and happiness than believe, if you wish to be a disciple of truth, then inquire Jordan Peterson is a great example of someone who tells his audience that if they want to strive for peace of the soul and happiness, they must believe And so he uses or perhaps abuses, this simplified idea of Nietzsche's.
1:08:50
That truth serves life in order to try and convince, you know, an increasingly atheistic Society to ignore the unbelievab ility of Christianity and simply return to, you know, the safety of its ideas.
1:09:07
Meacham.
Meanwhile is a disciple of Truth.